## A call on conferences for more equity and the inclusion of diversity
This blog post is dedicated to of all the people who care about equity and inclusion of diversity, especially with regards to collaborations with researchers and practitioners from low, lower-middle, and upper-middle income economy countries. Here, I tell the back story about how the largest and oldest coral reef research society, the International Coral Reef Society (ICRS), changed their operational model for running their International Coral Reef Symposium (ICRS) to improve participation and access by strategically reducing the cost barriers to delegates from developing countries. 

---
 
Here’s my personal story:
It would have probably been by chance that I found myself at a Spanish-speaking meeting at the Reef Future Conference in 2018. Luckily, my Spanish was fairly good as I lived for 3 years in Colombia to collect the data for my PhD in 2010. At that meeting, I listened to 25 scientists and practitioners from 5 Latin American countries who were lamenting that nobody in the world has ever heard about their massive coral reef restoration projects. It seems, non-English conservation papers are mostly ignored. I decided to help out, so I started interviewing them. I sat together with each of them to ask them questions about about cost, duration, area and feasibility of their projects in reaching their overall goals. Together, we wrote a multi-author scientific [Bayraktarov et al.2020b](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0228477 "Link to Bayraktarov et al 2020b paper") paper reviewing the coral reef restoration efforts of Latin American Countries and Territories over the following 2 years.
 
But I wanted to go further in giving those people the chance to have a voice at international meetings. In 2020, we submitted a symposium to the largest coral reef conference, the ICRS, to showcase those coral reef restoration efforts in the Caribbean and Eastern Tropical Pacific and got 17 presenters from lower-middle-income countries such as Puerto Rico, Mexico, Bonaire, Curacao, and Colombia. ICRS 2020 was postponed to ICRS 2021 due to COVID-19 and was entirely online, however, none of the accepted delegates could afford the 350 Euro participation fee, so our symposium changed completely.
 
In 2022, the ICRS will be a hybrid event hosted in Germany and the online participation fees jumped to 395 Euro (the in person fees are 830 Euro). I should note that 395 Euro represent 70-80% of the average monthly income in the countries where the delegates were from. The ICRS have resubmitted all accepted symposia, presentations and posters that were accepted in the virtual ICRS 2021. But I doubted that anyone from a poor country would be ever able to afford those costs.
 
I felt very strongly that we needed a cultural change for more inclusion of diversity and towards more equity. This is why I was prepared to step down as a chair if ICRS didn't waive the online participation fees for delegates from lower-middle-income countries. At the time of writing, I had no idea whether my call would lead to any change but at least I was full of hope that it would stimulate a discourse for a potential change to happen in the near future.

#What
 
Equality is giving all people the same resources or opportunities, that is - all people no matter their country of origin can register for the ICRS and have to pay the same registration fee.

Equity recognises that people are different and that some might have difficult circumstances. So equity allocates the exact resources needed to reach an equal outcome, that is - people from developing countries can apply to get their online participation fees waived so that they can partake in the scientific discourse with everyone else.
