## Elisa's 40 Under 40

40 under 40 is a list by the [Fortune magazine](https://fortune.com/ "Official Webpage of Fortune Magazine") on the most influential young leaders of the year in the tech industry. Their list doesn't expand to scientists or anyone working outside of tech and has been often referred to as being subjective about power and influence. Today, exactly 40 days before my 40th birthday, I reflect on my life as a female scientist and ponder what may lie ahead of me. These are my very personal musings on my life's professional and personal achievements, where to next and what I would have loved to tell my 20yrs-old self.

---

### The rebellious teenager
Leading up to my 20ies, I was someone who probably could have been described as a rebel. This was probably my response to being a stranger in my own 'new' country as my family had moved from Bulgaria to Germany when I was 8. Day in, day out I was faking being a German, so I don't get bullied at school and eventually I perfected the skill including my accent-free speech in German. And I did look like a rebel - long hair, black clothes, leather and of course, my beautiful 125ccm Yamaha TDR motorbike that I got when I was 16. During most of my teenage years, I listened to Heavy Metal, went to metal gigs, and played role plays and live action role plays, while pursuing the dream of becoming an astronaut. The love for reaching for the start must have come from the time when I got notified that I was the best pupil at school and hence was eligible to participate at the Deutsche Schueller Akademie - a 1-week long retreat for bright students - doing a workshop in the 'Anatomy of the Universe'. And to be honest, at that stage of my life, I really felt, I’d rather be in a profession that gets me as far away as possible from masses of people. At some stage, I even met the German Physicist and Astronaut, Ulf Merbold and managed to ask him what to do to become an Astronaut. He said: "Go study Science! Study the most difficult scientific subject that you can find!" So, I did.

### My 20ies and the search for a purpose in life
I decided to enrol in Biophysics with 10 other crazy humans and moved from Frankfort to Berlin in 2002 - home city of the Humboldt University and probably the best city of Germany with its arts, theatre, music, underground scene and diversity of people from all countries and cultures – and of course: foods! Biophysics, or the Physics of Dynamic Biological Systems was hard, because we were expected to obtain our certificates together with the Physicists, the Biologists and the Informaticians but we didn’t have the time to focus entirely on any of those subjects. It was quite overkill. After obtaining the German Vordiplom (BSc), I really needed a break and obtained a grant to study abroad with the Erasmus/Socrates program for a year. I chose the Canary Islands as my exchange location where I learned Spanish, Diving and a bit of Surfing. Perhaps not the most studious period of my life but I made some incredible friendships that lasted a lifelong and saw places that were beautiful beyond comprehension like the Anaga Mountains on Teneriffe. I finished my MSc in Biophysics in 2008 specialising in Membrane Biophysics. In fact, my thesis discovered some quite important information about the Influenza virus fusion and which parts of the cellular membrane we should be targeting with antiviral drugs. That same year, I interviewed at the European Space Administration, however, wasn't successful. Having this dream burst to pieces after 15 years of pursuing and working towards it threw me straight into an existential crisis and the search for my life's purpose. The continuing search led me to the [Hydra Field Station](http://ifmw.de/en/index.php/ "Webpage of Hydra Institute") on Elba in Italy where I initially participated in a diving training for university students on 'Methods of Underwater Research'. There it was! A new dream and vocation were born - I didn’t become an astronaut but I was on the best way of becoming an aquanaut. I've spent several months training at the Hydra station in preparation for the European Scientific Diver training. I had secured a slot in the 5-weeks professional training at the Alfred-Wegener Institute on Helgoland in the Nord Sea. A cold and stormy place. And that got me thinking that I'd really like to study the Ocean with a focus on field work. So, I started the study of Marine Microbiology at the Max Planck Institute of Marine Biology in Bremen in 2008. Bremen is undeniable the Mecca of marine science in Germany with its Max Planck, Leibniz, Alfred-Wegener Institute and Bremen Uni. This second MSc opened my eyes for international collaboration and how it is to work and learn at a very well-funded research institute. I finished my degree specialising in Marine Biogeochemistry and specifically studying the metabolism of bacteria in shallow-water hydrothermal vents which were totally adapted to their low-PhD environment. Max Planck also provided the connection to a bright marine scientist, now [Dr Duygu Sevilgen](https://centrescientifique.mc/en/annuaire-scientifique/fiche/duygu-sevilgen "Duygu's profile in Monaco"), who took me as a Diver and Research Assistant, first to Helgoland and then to the Arctic, to study the impacts of climate change on microphytobenthos – or little algae that live at the marine sediment surface – by using the fanciest ever microsensors. I remember being surrounded by beautiful sunlight at 2am at night and pondering what the heck should I be doing with my life, so that I can live a life with a purpose. After the Arctic field work, I went from the snow into the tropics. I travelled for one month through Malaysia and encountered the sheer beauty of coral reefs. Little did I know that coral reefs would captivate me for the next several years to come! In 2010, I started a PhD in Coral Reef Ecology at the Leibniz Centre for Tropical Marine Ecology but was permanently deployed in Santa Marta, Colombia to study the coral reef ecosystem of Tayrona National Park in the Colombian Caribbean.


### My mid-30ies and finding ground under my feet as an academic
After 2 years, 9 months and 7 scientific publications, I could finally call myself Dr Bayraktarov – a doctor of coral reefs. In 2013, I followed love who had moved from Colombia to Australia to start his PhD. For me, a new chapter was about to begin – the hunt for highly attractive postdoctoral jobs in coral reef ecology. It didn’t make it any easier that I was an outsider, and no one had heard my name. And then I was also trying to find employment at some of Australia’s most prestigious universities for ecology in Brisbane. In 2014, I was successful finding a job as a Research Assistant at the Global Change Institute, which was a new institute to create change based at the University of Queensland. This is when my collaboration (later mentorship and then friendship) with the wonderful [Dr Megan Saunders](http://megsaunders.github.io) [Dr Megan Saunders](http://megsaunders.github.io “Megan’s webpage”) began. Megan introduced me to the study of seagrass and put me on a project to start developing a database integrating information from published papers, reports and webpages on the [cost and feasibility of marine coastal restoration]( https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1890/15-1077 “Cost and feasibility paper from 2016”). I will never forget the trust Megan put in me when she asked me to lead to step up and lead this paper while she was in maternity with her first child. Over the course of 1.5 years, I had become an expert in marine coastal restoration. And I really wished, I would have pursued this direction of research but also, I decided to write a crazy grant application for an Endeavour Fellowship that would allow me to study the multi-factor effects of climate change, eutrophication on the interaction between corals and algae on Heron Island in the Southernmost part of the Great Barrier Reef. The grant was successful and sent me for four months on Heron Island where I worked 10-hrs days with no weekends on an experiment that received little attention by my supervisors but probably led to breaking my relationship and deteriorating my mental health. The work, despite of producing some surprising results around the winners and losers of the climate change and eutrophication game, never got published and reminds me of my time on ‘Prison Paradise’ (aka Heron Island). 2016 came with another scientific identity crisis. I participated at the largest coral reef conference in the World which was organised in Hawaii that year. Thousands of coral reef researchers who could afford the high registration fees and travel had gathered and all they were saying is that we need many more grants to do much more research to better understand coral reefs. I couldn’t believe it – it was a mass coral bleaching year for the Great Barrier Reef and all those folks wanted was more experiments! Not many were talking about that there’s enough data and that we need to do something (e.g., climate action, active adaptive management, nature-based solutions, restoration…) now before it’s too late for our World’s corals. I think, this must have been one of these light bulb moments where I turned my back to field work and experiments and decided to dedicate the next coming years of my career to Conservation Data Science. In 2016, I would have probably left Australia for good if it wasn’t for one of the greatest mentors in my life, [Prof Hugh Possigham](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hugh_Possingham “Hugh’s Wikipedia page”) to convince me to stay and take on a job, initially as a Research Assistant and then as a PostDoc developing Australia’s and the Worlds-first [Threatened Species Index](https://tsx.org.au/ “Webpage of the Threatened Species Index”). I remember that there was quite a bit of pushback, especially from the Federal Government that funded the project. There seemed to be this mantra that there’s not enough standardised data from repeated monitoring of threatened species out there. And in way, that was true – this data was sitting people’s computers and within reports, so my job required me to talk to over 300 data custodians about datasets on 254 bird, mammal, and plant species from over 20,000 locations across Australia, and from more than 400,000 surveys carried out over 50 years and convince them to share their gold with a common good project looking into how our threatened species are going. This required extroversion. It required confidence for the engagement with stakeholders. I had none and was haunted by an everlasting imposter syndrome. And then, presented with the option of either to resign or grow, I chose to do the most terrifying things that could have come to my mind – to learn how to perform in front of an audience my making up a scene on the go inspired by whatever the audience throws at me. It’s called Improvised Theatre. I started my improvised theatre training initially with a Brisbane Group called [Impro Mafia](https://www.impromafia.com/ “Webpage of Impro Mafia”) in 2016 and later with [Cam Percy](https://www.campercy.com/ “Cam’s webpage”) and her Impro Club. Impro teaches you to:
-	Embrace failure – it’s not so bad
-	Believe in yourself and trust that you have everything you need to wing every and any situation
-	Accept ‘gifts’ by adopting a “Yes-and” mentality
-	How people react to your body language
-	Trust your people – they will catch you if you fall
-	To become an attentive listener
-	Play, be silly and laugh
It was 2 years of incredibly hard work, and I had the opportunity to work closely with environmental non-governmental organisations, state/territories governments, natural resource management bodies, species recovery teams and brilliant scientists. In 2018, we released the first iteration of the TSX – a Threatened Species Index for Australia’s birds. Mammals followed in 2019 and Plants in 2020. Probably the most rewarding moments of my academic career were when I heard that the Federal Government of Australia had adopted the TSX as their very official reporting tool on threatened species status and then, about one year later, continuation funding for the project, now under a new management appeared through the [Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment]( http://www.nrm.gov.au/regional-land-partnerships “Webpage of Regional Land Partnerships Program”) and [TERN](https://www.tern.org.au/ “TERN’s webpage”). In May 2020, I left academia for good. After creating my reputation through the TSX, one of my project partners urged me to apply for a job as a Program Manager to lead the development of the digital innovation platform called [EcoCommons Australia](https://www.ecocommons.org.au/ “Webpage of EcoCommons Australia”).


### Leaving academia for impact (while feeling like an imposter)
- new job in management - new life
- working on work-life balance with a psychologist
- imposter syndrome; gathering evidence; the book of winning
- 

### The last decade of service to humans, animals and ecosystems
- helped a friend becoming a PR in Australia
- Over the last 8 years, I have worked as a Conservation Scientist at the University of Queensland and Griffith University and have contributed to protecting and managing the Australian environment by carrying out research and pulling data together to identify how people can improve the restoration of coral reefs, how likely those projects are to succeed and how expensive they are and also on the motivations that drive people to restore coral reefs, seagrass, mangroves, saltmarsh and oyster reefs. My research brought together the first ever cost & feasibility database for marine coastal restoration in 2015 which was used to inform the Australian Reef Trust’s Offsets calculator and was updated in 2020 in my own personal time and under no payment.
 
More recently, I led the development of Australia’s Threatened Species Index (TSX) which is the world’s first biodiversity indicator that tracks changes in Australian threatened species populations and tells us how our threatened birds, mammals and plants are going. Those trends also informed the recent Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act Review carried out by Graeme Samuel, which featured my submission as an independent researcher and on behalf of the TSX team to identify gaps in data, monitoring and management as well as a lack of standardised reporting on species population trends in Australia. The TSX since its first launch in 2018 by the former Australian Threatened Species Commissioner, Sally Box, has now been adopted as an official statistic by the Australian’s government’s Corporate Reporting and was also used and a performance criterion by a number of states (example from the Victorian Government here). My work on the TSX has mobilised data from over 300 data custodians on 254 bird, mammal and plant species and subspecies from over 20,000 locations across Australia, and from more than 400,000 surveys carried out over 50 years. This data, often sitting in reports, in drawers or on people’s personal computers would have been hidden from the public, if my team didn’t bring it all together. Most importantly, this work has produced a platform for a national ‘conversation’ about threatened and Near Threatened species, and thereby has increased community awareness and appreciation of our threatened biodiversity to create a mandate for investment in its protection.
 
Currently, I lead a team at the Griffith University which builds a digital innovation platform that will hopefully become the platform of choice for ecological and environmental modelling. We build virtual laboratories to empower researchers and policy decision-makers to spend less time on searching and wrangling of data as well as on configuring models and invest more time into solving environmental problems through world-leading modelling tools and access to highly curated datasets. In two weeks, on the 29th of Nov 2-4pm we will be opening this platform to people who volunteered to test it.
 
In my free time, I contribute to citizen science where I monitor local coral reefs and write reports for our local and state government or lend a hand to the Woodfordian Treehuggers in maintaining the conservation area of Woodford.

### What comes next?
- life isn't linear; often things happen and we don't see the bigger picture and that's fine
- TEDx here I come!
- 

### Recommendations for my 20-years old self on how to navigate life
- be more daring; failing is ok; you learn, you pick up yourself and you try again
- if you don't ask, the answer is always gonna be No
- scientic publications are great but they don't create much impact, unless they are picked up by a billionaire like Frank Mars
- professional goals need to be pursued in parallel with your personal goals (creative arts, starting a family, study) - it would be too late for you to pursue personal goals after you've finish all your professional bucket list
- you can always do more than you think you can - but only if you set clear goals early on and do every day a bit
- Time is the ultimate unit of life - think wisely how you spend every sec, min, hrs of your life. Life is so much more worth living if you can fill it with joy, play, silliness, daring greatly, failing, not taking yourself too serious. Feeling the fear and doing it anyway. Being bold, being vocal, stepping up for your thoughts and what you believe is fair.
- Laugh a lot, challenge the status quo, speak up when you need to, consume life's experiences with a big spoon and for fucks sake, get yourself a psychologist - everybody deserves to have one! If you get one, they will help you to navigate through all this jungle of confusion and stir through all those people who demand to have a piece of your valuable life time. Every minute of your life is precious - hold it dearly to your heart! Use it to act on impulses to seed the seeds for your dreams. Your time is valuable. You are valuable. Always. Don't waste it or give it away with no prospect of return in form of experience, reputation, joy, growth, and sheer entertainment

### Thoughts about biological expiry date of a childfree woman
- Not for the faint hearted (add some stats from the ABC ladies we need to talk podcast)
- There were times when I was workign 10-12 hrs days because I believed the scientice that I was developing; achieving scientific acolates often takes so # much work and time from you that you often can't focus on your personal goals, dreams, wants and desires.
- Freezing eggs and sperm donors
- Society is not equipped to give the same treatment of a scientist woman to a scientist man - they will always be that a trade-off. I was not willing to  pay that trade-off and sacrifice my academic career for family; probably would regards this as a mistake nowadays.
- 

